# 1-s2.0-S030095720600390X-main

## Page 1

Resuscitation (2007) 72, 364—370
CLINICAL PAPER
Compression force—depth relationship during
out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation
A.E. Tomlinson a,b, J. Nysaether c, J. Kramer-Johansen a,b,d,
P.A. Steen b,e, E. Dorph a,b,∗
a Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Ulleval University Hospital, N-0407 Oslo, Norway
b Surgical and Prehospital Divisions, Ulleval University Hospital, N-0407 Oslo, Norway
c Laerdal Medical AS, P.O. Box 377, N-4002 Stavanger, Norway
d Norwegian Air Ambulance, Department of Research and Education, N-1441 Drøbak, Norway
e University of Oslo, University Division, Ulleval University Hospital, N-0407 Oslo, Norway
Received 2 June 2006; received in revised form 8 July 2006; accepted 13 July 2006
KEYWORDS
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation;
CPR;
Chest compressions;
Chest compression
depth;
Chest compression force
Summary
Background: Recent clinical studies reporting the high frequency of inadequate chest
compression depth (<38 mm) during CPR, have prompted the question if adult human
chest characteristics render it difﬁcult to attain the recommended compression
depth in certain patients.
Material and methods: Using a specially designed monitor/deﬁbrillator equipped
with a sternal pad ﬁtted with an accelerometer and a pressure sensor, compression
force and depth was measured during CPR in 91 adult out-of-hospital cardiac arrest
patients.
Results: There was a strong non-linear relationship between the force of compression and depth achieved. Mean applied force for all patients was 30.3 ± 8.2 kg and
mean absolute compression depth 42 ± 8 mm. For 87 of 91 patients 38 mm compression depth was obtained with less than 50 kg. Stiffer chests were compressed more
forcefully than softer chests (p < 0.001), but softer chests were compressed more
deeply than stiffer chests (p = 0.001). The force needed to reach 38 mm compression depth (F38) and mean compression force were higher for males than for females:
29.8 ± 14.5 kg versus 22.5 ± 10.2 kg (p < 0.02), and 32.0 ± 8.3 kg versus 27.0 ± 7.0 kg
(p < 0.01), respectively. There was no signiﬁcant variation in F38 or compression depth
with age, but a signiﬁcant 1.5 kg mean decrease in applied force for each 10 years
increase in age (p < 0.05). Chest stiffness decreased signiﬁcantly (p < 0.0001) with an
increasing number of compressions performed. Average residual force during decompression was 1.7 ± 1.0 kg, corresponding to an average residual depth of 3 ± 2 mm.
 A Spanish translated version of the summary of this article appears as Appendix in the ﬁnal online version at
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2006.07.017.
∗Corresponding author at: Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Ulleval University Hospital, N-0407 Oslo, Norway.
Tel.: +47 23016800; fax: +47 23016799.
E-mail address: elizabeth.dorph@medisin.uio.no (E. Dorph).
0300-9572/$ — see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.resuscitation.2006.07.017

## Page 2

Compression force versus depth during CPR
365
Conclusion: In most out-of-hospital cardiac arrest victims adequate chest compression
depth can be achieved by a force <50 kg, indicating that an average sized and ﬁt
rescuer should be able to perform effective CPR in most adult patients.
© 2006 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Animal studies show that blood ﬂow increases with
increasing compression force and/or depth during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR),1—6 and
in humans end-tidal CO2 and systolic blood pressure increases linearly with applied force from
10 to 64 kg.5 The CPR guidelines recommend that
chest compressions should be applied with the
force necessary to depress the sternum 4—5 cm
(38—51 mm ∼1.5—2 in.) with each compression.7,8
There is, however, very limited information available describing the relationship between forces
applied to the sternum and the degree of displacement achieved during manual CPR on humans.5,9—12
Recent clinical studies have reported a high
frequency of inadequate chest compression depth
compared to guidelines recommendations.13,14 Inhospital more than one-third13 and out-of-hospital
more than half14 of the compressions were less than
38 mm deep. This raises the question if the mechanical characteristics of the adult human chest render
it difﬁcult to attain this depth in certain patients.
These characteristics have only been studied in
a few small cohorts of 10—16 in-hospital cardiac
arrest patients,10,11 and possible changes with time
during CPR or possible gender differences have, to
our knowledge, not been reported. We have therefore studied the dynamic relationship between
sternal compression force and displacement during
CPR in a larger number of out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest patients.
Material and methods
The material was collected during the third phase
of a large study of quality of CPR performed by
ambulance personnel.14 Except for the speciﬁcs on
compression depth and force, this section has been
presented in detail in previous reports,14,15 and
a more condensed version is therefore presented
here.
Study design and recruitment
The study was performed in three ambulance services: Akershus (Norway), Stockholm (Sweden), and
London (England) and approved by the respective regional ethics committees. Informed consent
for inclusion in the study was waived as decided
by these committees in accordance with paragraph 26 in the Helsinki Declaration.16 In this
prospective study registered at ClinicalTrials.gov
(NCT00138996, Initial release 29 August 2005)
patients older than 18 years suffering from out-ofhospital cardiac arrests of all causes were included.
In the ﬁrst phase quality of CPR was recorded
from the deﬁbrillators without feedback to the
rescuers.14 In the second phase rescuers received
feedback on CPR quality via the deﬁbrillators after
training in the use and meaning of the feedback
software (manuscript submitted).
Data collection for the present investigation,
the third phase in the study of CPR quality by
professional rescuers outside the hospital, was conducted between October 2004 and June 2005.
Before this last investigational phase was launched,
results from the ﬁrst phase were revealed to the
participants. Information about the strengths and
weaknesses concerning the quality of CPR performance was thus passed on to all personnel in each
of the three participating ambulance services, and
used by their CPR instructors to reinforce and tailor
retraining in the ACLS guidelines17 at each site.
All ambulances were staffed with paramedics.
In Stockholm they had a two-tiered system with a
nurse anesthetist in the second car attending cardiac arrests.
Equipment
Prototype deﬁbrillators based on standard Heartstart 4000 (Philips Medical Systems, Andover, MA,
USA) deﬁbrillators were deployed in six ambulances
at each site. The deﬁbrillators were approved for
investigational use in Europe (DNV; CE-mark; 2002OSL-MDD-0009) and in the USA (FDA; IDE# G020121).
The deﬁbrillators had an extra chest pad to be
mounted on the lower part of the sternum with
double adhesive tape. The pad was ﬁtted with
an accelerometer (ADXL202e, Analog Devices, USA)
and a force sensor (HBM DF2S-LAD from HBM,
Darmstadt, Germany). The heel of the rescuer’s
hand should be placed on top of the chest pad
and its movement was considered equal to that
of the sternum during chest compressions with
compression force >2 kg. A second accelerometer
within the deﬁbrillator enabled to be cancelled
out the global vertical motion of both patient and

## Page 3

366
A.E. Tomlinson et al.
deﬁbrillator. Trans-thoracic impedance was measured by applying a near constant sinusoidal
current across the standard deﬁbrillation pads and
accelerometer and impedance signals were stored
in an extra data card in the deﬁbrillators. The deﬁbrillators gave verbal and visual feedback on CPR
based on measured quality compared to a built in
set of target values.
Data processing
The force and acceleration signals were imported
into a mathematical software package (MATLAB®,
Natick, MA, USA) and processed ofﬂine. Compression depth x was found by integration from the
measured chest acceleration a and chest speed
v. To avoid depth ‘‘runoff’’ due to drift in the
accelerometer, minimum depth was synchronized
with minimum force for each compression.
The elastic force Fk(x) = k(x)x of the chest was
estimated by plotting measured force against calculated depth and subtracting the velocity-dependent
damping force (force hysteresis).11 x is here compression depth and k(x) is chest stiffness.
To compensate the depth curves for incomplete
release, the minimum ‘‘leaning’’ force Fk(xmin) was
measured between compressions and the corresponding minimum depth xmin estimated by help of
the measured chest stiffness, using the following
formula:
xmin = Fk(xmin)
k(xmin)
Chest stiffness and damping were then recalculated using the compensated depth curves. The
results were averaged across all compressions.
Based on the calculated stiffness k(x) of the
chest, the necessary force needed to reach 38 mm
(1.5 in.) compression depth, here termed F38, was
calculated. A higher value of F38 thus means a
stiffer chest. For episodes where 38 mm compression depth was not reached, F38 was estimated by
extrapolation of chest stiffness measured at lower
depths. F25 and F19, the forces necessary to reach
25 and 19 mm compression depth, were also calculated.
To characterise changes in chest stiffness during CPR, F25 (force needed to compress the chest
25 mm) was calculated as a function of the number
of compressions performed, in steps of 50 compressions. F25 was chosen as this compression depth was
achieved at one point in all except two patients
included in the study. In order to capture the effect
of compressions at the very start of CPR and in
the longer run, only episodes where no bystander
CPR had been performed and a minimum of 1000
compressions were administered, were analysed. A
total of 39 episodes were included.
To characterise how linear the relationship
between force and depth is for each episode, we
deﬁned the stiffness progressivity factor :
 = F38
2F19
For  = 1, the stiffness k(x) is the same at 19 and
38 mm compression depth. For  > 1 the stiffness
increases with increasing depth.
The applied force in an episode is deﬁned as the
average value of the maximum force of all compressions. Absolute compression depth was deﬁned
as average depth of all compressions after the
depth signal had been compensated for leaning.
The applied force and absolute compression depth,
as well as the leaning force and depth, were calculated for each episode.
Statistical analysis
Statistical calculations were performed using either
MATLAB or a statistical software package (SPSS
11.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Data are presented as mean ± S.D. when normality tests were
passed and median (25, 75 percentile) when these
failed.
Regression analysis was used to check for significant trends between the stiffness variable F38 and
the applied force and absolute compression depth.
To investigate whether chest stiffness changed
under continued CPR, F25 was calculated every 50
compressions and regression analysis used to check
for signiﬁcant variations in F25 with the number of
compressions. Regression analysis was also used to
check for signiﬁcant variations with age.
Student’s t-test and Wilcoxon rank sum test were
used to test for signiﬁcant differences in mean and
median values, respectively, of measurement variables between patient sex and size.
Results
CPR episodes were analysed from 91 patients,
including 61 men and 30 women aged between 18
and 92 years. Median age was 70 (61, 81) years.
Figure 1 shows the relationship between compression force and depth (chest wall elasticity) for
all the individual episodes. Mean applied force for
all patients was 30.3 ± 8.2 kg and mean absolute
compression depth 42 ± 8 mm.

## Page 4

Compression force versus depth during CPR
367
Figure 1
Compression force (kg) vs. absolute compression depth (mm) for all episodes.
For eight patients the recommended minimum
compression depth of 38 mm was never reached
(maximum force applied for these patients ranged
from 14.7 to 37.4 kg) and for two patients a depth of
25 mm was never achieved (maximum force applied
for these patients was 21.3 and 37.4 kg). For these
patients F25 and F38 were estimated by extrapolation. Mean calculated F25 was 13.9 ± 6.6 kg and
mean calculated F38 27.5 ± 13.6 kg.
For 87 of 91 patients 38 mm compression depth
was obtained with less than 50 kg. There was a signiﬁcant trend that stiffer chests were compressed
more forcefully than softer chests (p < 0.001),
but softer chests were still compressed more
deeply than stiffer chests (p = 0.001) as shown in
Figures 2 and 3.
Average residual force during decompression was
1.7 ± 1.0 kg, corresponding to an average residual
depth of 3 ± 2 mm. For all patients, the median (25,
75 percentile) percentage of compressions with a
residual force above 3 kg was 6 (2, 19).
Both F38 and mean compression force were
higher for males than for females: 29.8 ± 14.5 kg
versus 22.5 ± 10.2 kg (p < 0.02) (Figure 4), and
32.0 ± 8.3 kg versus 27.0 ± 7.0 kg (p < 0.01), respectively. For 47 patients, the rescuer estimated the
size of the patient’s chest (small, medium or large).
There were no signiﬁcant differences in F25 or F38
between the three chest size groups.
There was no signiﬁcant variation in F38 or compression depth with age, but a signiﬁcant 1.5 kg
mean reduction in applied force for each 10 years
increase in age (p < 0.05, linear regression).
The
average
stiffness
progressivity
factor
 = F38/2F19 was 1.41 ± 0.25, signiﬁcantly higher
for females (1.52 ± 0.33) than males (1.35 ± 0.18)
Figure 2
The relationship between average force (kg)
used and force (kg) needed to reach 38 mm compression depth. Open circles represent measured values; stars
extrapolated data. The dashed line represents the best
linear ﬁt to the data with extrapolated values included
(r = 0.35, p = 0.001).
(p < 0.01). There was a signiﬁcant increase in 
with age (p = 0.005). This increase in progressivity
with age is associated with non-signiﬁcant trends
towards decreased F19 and increased F38 with age.
There was a signiﬁcant decrease (p < 0.0001)
in the average value of F25
(chest stiffness)
with increasing number of compressions performed
(Figure 5). The decrease in stiffness was however
not uniform across the patient group, with a signiﬁcant decrease for only 13 of 39 patients. For 7
Figure 3
The relationship between average compression depth (mm) obtained and force (kg) needed to reach
38 mm compression depth. Open circles represent measured values; stars extrapolated data. The dashed line
represents the best linear ﬁt to the data with extrapolated values included (r = −0.75, p < 0.0001).

## Page 5

368
A.E. Tomlinson et al.
Figure 4
Box plots of the force needed to compress
the chest 38 mm (minimum depth recommended in the
guidelines) for females (F) and males (M).
Figure 5
The average force needed to reach 25 mm
compression depth (F25) as a function of the number of
chest compressions performed. The dashed line represents the best linear ﬁt to the data (r = −0.72, p < 0.001).
patients stiffness increased during the 1000 compressions.
Discussion
For
chest
compressions
to
be
efﬁcient
they
must be executed with a force sufﬁcient to
produce
adequate
sternal
displacement,
and
the
present
guidelines
recommend
4—5 cm
(38—51 mm ∼1.5—2 in.).7,8
To
date,
there
are
only limited clinical data on the compression
forces needed to achieve this compression depth
in human cardiac arrest victims,5,9—12 and thus
there is a continuing debate concerning whether
it is possible for even an average ﬁt and sized
adult rescuer to provide chest compressions with
the force necessary to displace the sternum to an
adequate depth.11
The present study provides comprehensive information concerning the elastic properties of the
human chest during chest compressions and the
forces needed to induce a given depth of sternal deﬂection in an actual cardiac arrest situation.
The study contains three times as many patients
as all previous published studies combined, all
from Johns Hopkins with a total of 27 cardiac
arrest patients10,11 and one human volunteer.18 The
median age of 70 years old and sex distribution with
two-third men among our study subjects should be
representative for the average out-of-hospital cardiac arrests population.14,19,20
The mean 27.5 ± 13.6 kg force required for
38 mm compression depth in the present study
tends to be lower than the mean 43.9 ± 4.0 kg
(431 ± 40 N) reported by Gruben et al. in 16 cardiac arrest patients.11 In their study 38 mm was not
reached in 9 of the 16 patients whose values were
calculated by extrapolation. Chest wall elasticity
varied greatly between individuals in the present
study with a range in force from 10 to 54 kg in
patients where 38 mm depth was achieved. Gruben
et al. also found a large range from 24.8 to estimated 81 kg (245 to estimated 800 N) for 38 mm,
and estimated that >71.3 kg (>700 N) would have
been required in 5 of the 16 patients. The authors
were concerned that it would be difﬁcult, let alone
unrealistic, for the average rescuer to achieve even
the minimum recommended 38 mm compression
depth during CPR.11 These reservations are still
upheld in discussions concerning the possibility of
delivering adequate chest compressions.21 This was
not a big problem in the present study where 38 mm
would have been reached in 87 of 91 patients during manual out-of-hospital CPR with less than 50 kg
force, although lightweight rescuers will probably
not be able to compress all chests to guidelines
level. More than half the patients were at some
point compressed to the maximum recommended
depth of 51 mm8 in the present study, while this
was not reached in any patient in Gruben et al.’s
study.11
Our ﬁnding that there is a strong non-linear relationship between the force of compression and
sternal displacement achieved, corroborate the
observations from the Johns Hopkins group. In
their three studies10,11,18 the relationship between
compression force and depth also behaved nonlinearly. This is different from commonly used CPR
training manikins which usually have spring loaded
chests with a linear relationship between force and

## Page 6

Compression force versus depth during CPR
369
depth.10,11,22 This means that the elastic force in
manikins is higher than in humans at the onset of
compression and lower at higher depths of compression. If it is important that CPR is performed to a
certain depth as recommended in the guidelines,
trainees should learn to assess the correct depth
of compression. It is probably advantageous that
they practise on manikins mimicking more closely
the elastic properties of the human chest with a
non-linear force—depth relationship during compressions, and while the mean compression force
required in the present study ﬁts relatively well
with the chest stiffness in commonly used training
manikins,10,22 an adjustable stiffness is desirable
to account for the great variation in human chest
properties.
Although there was a difference between sexes
in chest stiffness, the mean force needed for 38 mm
compression in the current study was well below
40 kg for males with stiffer chests as well as for
females. The ribs form the main elastic component and surround the internal organs that may
cause damping. Women are generally more delicately built than men, and this may result in a
more elastic ribcage and a softer chest. Given that
soft chests were compressed more deeply than stiff
chests in this study, one would also expect that
females were compressed more deeply than males.
The fact that this was not the case may partly be
explained by the smaller size of women: the rescuer may feel that it is not appropriate to compress
so deep on a small individual. In addition the progressivity factor was higher for females, the force
required per mm increased more rapidly with depth
for females, possibly due to their smaller size. On
the other hand we could not ﬁnd any relationship
between different chest sizes and chest elasticity.
This could relate to the rather simplistic procedure
for estimating chest size, which was left to the
subjective judgment of the rescuers. On the other
hand, Tsitlik et al.10 did a thorough registration of
chest morphometric data in their study and came
to the same conclusion.
One of the more intriguing ﬁndings in this study
was that rescuers seemed to hold back force and
accept compression depths below 38 mm when confronted with a stiff chest, while softer chests most
commonly were compressed within guidelines limits, or even too deeply (>51 mm). It is tempting
to speculate that rescuers control compressions by
a combination of perceived adequate force and
depth, and that the perception of adequate force
is important for stopping further compression. This
occurred despite the fact that rescuers were continuously given visual feedback and voice prompts
to guide the depth of chest compressions and other
CPR elements. Even most of the stiffer chests could
be compressed 38 mm using forces <50 kg, but rescuers often seemed to avoid following the voice
prompt for deeper compressions under these circumstances. On the other end of the spectrum
rescuers frequently ignored voice prompts telling
that compressions were too deep (>51 mm) on
softer chests. It could be speculated that rescuers
are afraid of rapidly tiring23 or causing damage with
high force on a stiff chest, while they feel that
they are not brutal when compressing a soft chest
deeply without much effort and are ‘‘getting the
circulation going’’. In both cases they might choose
to ignore the feedback. It is also possible that frequent training on manikins where a set ‘‘average’’
force is required to give 38—51 mm compressions,
give them a feel of what is the ‘‘correct’’ forceindependent on the force required on a speciﬁc
patient.
We were also interested in how chest elasticity would change over time, or more precisely with
the number of compressions performed. In experiments on healthy young pigs the chest conﬁguration
changes considerably during the initial phase of
CPR.24 We therefore chose to analyse this effect
only in cardiac arrest episodes where bystander
CPR had not been performed and where less than
1 min of unrecorded professional rescuer CPR had
been carried out. The signiﬁcant decrease in chest
stiffness with time could be due to rib or sternal
fractures which commonly occur during CPR.25 As
mentioned above, the rib cage represents the main
elastic component of the chest. Broken ribs will
most certainly inﬂuence the elastic properties of
the chest.
An important limitation to our study is that chest
compression depth as studied was calibrated for the
presence of a ﬁrm compression surface. Although
most out-of-hospital cardiac arrest patients receive
CPR on the ﬂoor or ground, chest compression depth
may be overestimated in some if the patient rests
on a compressible underlay.
The patient stiffness may also be underestimated if some of the force is delivered outside the
sternal pad area during compressions, but this is
probably not very important as the pad is 25 mm
thick, and our experience is that the force is
concentrated much more than without a sternal
pad.
Conclusion
In most out-of-hospital cardiac arrest victims adequate chest compression depth can be achieved by
applying 50 kg force to the sternum. This means

## Page 7

370
A.E. Tomlinson et al.
that average sized and ﬁt rescuers should be capable of performing effective CPR in adult patients.
Conﬂict of interest statement
Authors Elizabeth Dorph, Ann-Elin Tomlinson and Jo
Kramer-Johansen have no conﬂicts of interest to
declare. Jon Nysaether is a full time employee on
a ﬁxed salary at Laerdal Medical, Stavanger. Petter
Andreas Steen is a member of the board of directors
for Laerdal Medical and The Norwegian Air Ambulance.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from Laerdal
Medical Corporation (Stavanger, Norway), Norwegian Air Ambulance (Drøbak, Norway), Laerdal
Foundation for Acute Medicine, Jahre Foundation
and Health Region East. The authors wish to thank
all participating paramedics and especially the
local coordinators and instructors at each site;
Hallstein Sørebø, MD, Leif Svensson, MD, Bob Fellows, MD, Jan Ottem, Lars Didrik Flingtorp, Helena
Borovszky, Lars Safsten, Andrew Nord, and Allan
Bromley. The technical expertise and helpfulness
of Helge Myklebust at Laerdal Medical is greatly
appreciated.
References
1. Maier GW, Tyson Jr GS, Olsen CO, et al. The physiology
of external cardiac massage: high-impulse cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Circulation 1984;70:86—101.
2. Maier GW, Newton Jr JR, Wolfe JA, et al. The inﬂuence
of manual chest compression rate on hemodynamic support
during cardiac arrest: high-impulse cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Circulation 1986;74:IV51—9.
3. Ditchey RV, Winkler JV, Rhodes CA. Relative lack of coronary blood ﬂow during closed-chest resuscitation in dogs.
Circulation 1982;66:297—302.
4. Bellamy RF, DeGuzman LR, Pedersen DC. Coronary blood ﬂow
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in swine. Circulation
1984;69:174—80.
5. Ornato JP, Levine RL, Young DS, Racht EM, Garnett AR, Gonzalez ER. The effect of applied chest compression force
on systemic arterial pressure and end-tidal carbon dioxide
concentration during CPR in human beings. Ann Emerg Med
1989;18:732—7.
6. Babbs CF, Voorhees WD, Fitzgerald KR, Holmes HR, Geddes LA. Relationship of blood pressure and ﬂow during
CPR to chest compression amplitude: evidence for an
effective compression threshold. Ann Emerg Med 1983;12:
527—32.
7. Handley AJ, Koster R, Monsieurs K, Perkins GD, Davies
S, Bossaert L. European Resuscitation Council guidelines
for resuscitation 2005. Section 2. Adult basic life support
and use of automated external deﬁbrillators. Resuscitation
2005;67(Suppl 1):S7—S23.
8. Part 4. Adult basic life support. Circulation 2005;112:IV19—
34.
9. Vallis CJ, Mackenzie I, Lucas BG. The force necessary
for external cardiac compression. Practitioner 1979;223:
268—70.
10. Tsitlik JE, Weisfeldt ML, Chandra N, Effron MB, Halperin HR,
Levin HR. Elastic properties of the human chest during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Crit Care Med 1983;11:685—92.
11. Gruben KG, Guerci AD, Halperin HR, Popel AS, Tsitlik JE.
Sternal force—displacement relationship during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. J Biomech Eng 1993;115:195—201.
12. Ornato JP, Gonzalez ER, Garnett AR, Levine RL, McClung BK.
Effect of cardiopulmonary resuscitation compression rate on
end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration and arterial pressure
in man. Crit Care Med 1988;16:241—5.
13. Abella BS, Alvarado JP, Myklebust H, et al. Quality of cardiopulmonary resuscitation during in-hospital cardiac arrest.
JAMA 2005;293:305—10.
14. Wik L, Kramer-Johansen J, Myklebust H, et al. Quality of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation during out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest. JAMA 2005;293:299—304.
15. Kramer-Johansen J, Wik L, Steen PA. Advanced cardiac life
support before and after tracheal intubation-direct measurements of quality. Resuscitation 2006;68:61—9.
16. World Medical Assosciation Declaration of Helsinki. Helsinki,
Finland: World Medical association; 1964. [Updated 2004,
available at http://www.wma.net/e/policy/b3, accessed
April 14, 2006].
17. Guidelines 2000 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
emergency cardiovascular care—–an international consensus
on science. European Resuscitation Council. Resuscitation
2000;46:1—448.
18. Bankman IN, Gruben KG, Halperin HR, Popel AS, Guerci AD,
Tsitlik JE. Identiﬁcation of dynamic mechanical parameters
of the human chest during manual cardiopulmonary resuscitation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 1990;37:211—7.
19. Herlitz J, Svensson L, Holmberg S, Angquist KA, Young M.
Efﬁcacy of bystander CPR: intervention by lay people and by
health care professionals. Resuscitation 2005;66:291—5.
20. Herlitz J, Eek M, Holmberg M, Engdahl J, Holmberg S. Characteristics and outcome among patients having out of hospital
cardiac arrest at home compared with elsewhere. Heart
2002;88:579—82.
21. Rottenberg EM. Quality of cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
JAMA 2005;293:2090—1.
22. Baubin MA, Gilly H, Posch A, Schinnerl A, Kroesen GA.
Compression characteristics of CPR manikins. Resuscitation
1995;30:117—26.
23. Hightower D, Thomas SH, Stone CK, Dunn K, March JA. Decay
in quality of closed-chest compressions over time. Ann Emerg
Med 1995;26:300—3.
24. Wik L, Naess PA, Ilebekk A, Nicolaysen G, Steen PA. Effects
of various degrees of compression and active decompression on haemodynamics, end-tidal CO2, and ventilation
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation of pigs. Resuscitation
1996;31:45—57.
25. Hoke RS, Chamberlain D. Skeletal chest injuries secondary
to
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.
Resuscitation
2004;63:327—38.
