# jtd-08-03-513

## Page 1

© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
Introduction
Respiratory disease is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in infants and imposes a significant impact
on health care. With technical advance in respiratory
detection, infant pulmonary function testing has become
an important noninvasive method for assessing respiratory
pathophysiology (1). It is critical to measure respiratory
function for the treatment and study of pediatric lung
disease (2). Unlike older children, infants cannot perform
routine pulmonary function tests (such as forced expiratory
volume at one second). Therefore, tidal breathing is the
main pulmonary function testing method used in infants.
The single occlusion technique (SOT) is a noninvasive
technique for measuring respiratory compliance (Crs)
and resistance (Rrs). The SOT is an objective and easily
applicable technique for assessing lung function in infants.
Original Article
Reference values for resistance and compliance based on the
single occlusion technique in healthy infants from Southeast
China
Jianfeng Huang
1, Hao Zhang
2, Mingzhi Zhang
1, Xiaobo Zhang
1, Libo Wang
1
1Respiratory Department, Children’s Hospital of FuDan University, Shanghai 201102, China;
2Respiratory Department, Shanghai Children’s Medical
Center Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, China
Contributions: (I) Conception and design: J Huang, H Zhang; (II) Administrative support: J Huang, H Zhang; (III) Provision of study materials
or patients: J Huang; (IV) Collection and assembly of data: M Zhang, X Zhang; (V) Data analysis and interpretation: J Huang, H Zhang; (VI)
Manuscript writing: All authors; (VII) Final approval of manuscript: All authors.
Correspondence to: Hao Zhang. Respiratory Department, Shanghai Children’s Medical Center Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, 1678 Dongfang Road, Pudong, Shanghai 200127, China. Email: zhang123hao2004@163.com; Libo Wang. Respiratory Department,
Children’s Hospital of FuDan University, 399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai 201102, China. Email: wanglbc@163.com.
Background: Respiratory disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in infants and has a large
impact on health care. The aim of this study was to present the reference values of resistance and compliance
by using a single occlusion technique (SOT) in healthy infants in Southeast China.
Methods: Respiratory compliance (Crs) and respiratory resistance (Rrs) were measured in healthy
infants, aged 1–96 weeks, by using SOT in the Children’s Hospital of FuDan University (Shanghai, China).
For comparison, the infants were grouped by age as follows: 1–24, 25–48, 49–72 and 73–96 weeks. Multiple
regression analysis was performed using age, length, weight, and body mass index (BMI) as the independent
variables to obtain predictive equations, separated according to sex.
Results: We measured 205 healthy infants from birth up to 96 weeks of age (112 boys, 93 girls). Height
and weight increased significantly with age. The Rrs declined with length, whereas the Crs increased. The
median Rrs was 5.04 kPa/L/sec (range, 3.73–6.82 kPa/L/sec), and the mean Crs was 119.52±60.47 mL/kPa.
Regression equations for Rrs and Crs were obtained.
Conclusions: We obtained reference values for passive respiratory mechanics by using SOT in
healthy infants from Southeast China. These data provide references for assessing the normality of SOT
measurements in infants.
Keywords: Resistance; compliance; infants
Submitted Dec 26, 2015. Accepted for publication Feb 02, 2016.
doi: 10.21037/jtd.2016.02.69
View this article at: http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/jtd.2016.02.69

## Page 2

514
Huang et al. Resistance and compliance in healthy infants
© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
It was first proposed by Olinsky et al. and later improved by
Katier et al. and Gappa et al. (3,4). Crs and Rrs are two of the
most widely used parameters in infant pulmonary function
testing. The current guidelines describe the equipment,
signal processing, data handling, and control, as well as the
acceptance criteria for assessing the SOT in infants. However,
in China, normal reference values are lacking for resistance
and compliance using the SOT in infants; therefore, normal
reference values need to be determined for the evaluation of
respiratory development and for the diagnosis and treatment
of respiratory diseases in infants.
Materials and methods
Study participants
The participants of this study were infants who visited
the Children’s Hospital of FuDan University (Shanghai,
China) from September 2013 to September 2014 for health
examinations. For the purposes of our study, “infant” refers
to a child aged <96 weeks. The infants were divided into
four age groups: 1–24, 25–48, 49–72 and 73–96 weeks.
The exclusion criteria included (I) gestational age of less
than 37 weeks; (II) one or more symptoms of respiratory
tract infections (e.g., fever ≥38 ℃, cough, rhinorrhea, and
vomiting) within 4 weeks; and (III) a history of congenital
cardiopulmonary disease.
Measurements
Infant pulmonary function testing was performed using
the Jaeger MasterScreen BabyBody system (Erich Jaeger,
GmbH, Würzburg, Germany). The system was calibrated
daily before the measurement. A silicone anesthesia
facemask of the appropriate size covered the infants’ nose
and mouth. The infants were sedated before the test. Oral
chloral hydrate (100 mg/kg) was used for sedation. The
infants were brought by their parents to the hospital on the
day of the procedure after fasting for at least 4 hr, as per the
arrangement of our conscious sedation unit, and had not
slept for 3 hours before the study.
At the beginning of the test, the child breathed quietly
and smoothly. When the infant’s end expiratory level was
stable, the airway was briefly occluded at the end-inspiratory
part of the tidal breath until an airway pressure plateau
was observed, and the Hering-Breuer reflex was invoked
to elicit relaxation of the respiratory system. The linear
portion of the passive flow-volume curve was identified.
From the intercepts on the flow and volume axes, the Crs
and Rrs were calculated. For an overall understanding of
the physiological status, flow-volume loops were collected
to estimate the tidal volumes, the ratio of time to peak tidal
expiratory flow over total expiratory time and the ratio
of volume to peak expiratory flow over total expiratory
volume. The data were required to meet guidelines of the
European Respiratory Society (ERS)/American Thoracic
Society (ATS) task force on infant lung function: (I) smooth
expiration within 10% of the previous expiration; (II)
the decay of the exhalation should be linear and smooth
without glottic closure, early inspiration, or braking; (III)
an occlusion plateau of 100 ms or longer; and (IV) standard
deviation of the pressure plateau less than 0.01 kPa (4).
Informed consent was obtained from the parents or
guardians of all children. This study was approved by the
research ethics committee of Children’s Hospital of FuDan
University (Shanghai, China). The clinical data in the study
do not disclose the identity of the participants.
Statistical analysis
The statistical analyses were performed with the IBM SPSS
Statistics version 20.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY,
USA). Descriptive statistics were computed as the mean
and standard deviation for continuous variables or as the
median and 25
th–75
th percentiles in the event of a skewed
distribution. For categorical variables, the descriptive
statistics were computed as the absolute frequency and
percent. The Mann-Whitney test was used for nonnormally distributed continuous variables, and Student’s
t test was used for normally distributed continuous
variables. Regression analysis was used to develop the
prediction equations of the parameters (i.e., Crs and Rrs).
Age, weight, height, and body mass index (BMI) were a
priori considered possible determinants. The associations
of predictor variables with the dependent variables Crs and
Rrs were examined by using single-variable models. The
determinants that significantly improved (i.e., P<0.05) the
fraction of explained variance of the dependent variables
were determined through stepwise multivariable regression
analysis. Interaction terms and several transformations
of the predictors were composed and estimated in the
regression models. The fit of the models was assessed with
the check of normality of residuals. The coefficient of
determination (R
2), distribution of residuals, residual
standard deviations, and homogeneity of variances
were analyzed.

## Page 3

515
Journal of Thoracic Disease, Vol 8, No 3 March 2016
© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
Table 1 Comparison of anthropometric parameters of infants in different age groups
Age
Male, n (%)
Length (cm)
Weight (kg)
Body mass index (kg/m
2)
Groups
1–24 weeks (n=84)
49 (58.3)
59.28±6.83
5.82±2.11
16.01±3.01
25–48 weeks (n=35)
19 (54.2)
70.91±5.22
8.64±1.27
17.24±5.22
49–72 weeks (n=36)
20 (55.5)
77.10±3.57
10.3±1.49
17.27±1.49
73–96 weeks (n=50)
24 (48.0)
81.91±5.40
10.86±1.38
16.26±2.09
F/χ
2
1.27
181.79
108.66
2.96
P
0.742
<0.005
<0.005
0.05
The data for length, weight, and body mass index are presented as the mean ± the standard deviation.
Table 2 Comparison of the lung function results of the different age groups
Lung function
Total
Range
1–24 weeks
25–48 weeks
49–72 weeks
76–98 weeks
F
P
Rr (kPa/L/s)
5.04
1.32–23.9
6.39
5.11
4.20
3.74
12.86
<0.005
3.73
5
3.88
3.17
2.78
6.82
8.15
6.97
6.11
4.72
Crs (mL/kPa)
119.52±60.47
17.2–287
77.95±46.16
123.51± 50.64
141.17±44.75
170.58± 50.14
42.5
<0.005
VT (mL)
88.75±9.97
81.7–95.8
38.49±14.11*
63±20.01
80.93±11.54
93.5±13.37*
166.85
<0.005
VT/Kg (mL/kg)
7.59±1.34
7.1–9.6
6.69±1.04*
7.77±1.16
8.04±1.21
8.62±1
36.37
<0.005
RR/min
30.05
18–74.8
36.9
29.7
26.1
24.4
40.91
<0.005
25.1
32.9
25.1
23.85
22.4
36.5
46.2
33
30.25
27.5
TPTEF/TE (%)
31.74±9.26
24.6–51.7
30.75±8.23
29.15±8.25
33.63±8.03
33.56±11.4*
2.47
0.062
VPTEF/VE (%)
32.02±7.95
26–48.9
30.85±6.59
29.76±6.77
33.72±6.79
34.1±10.43*
3.40
0.019
RR, respiratory rate; TPTEF/TE (%), ratio of time to peak tidal expiratory flow to total expiratory time; VPTEF/VE (%), ratio of
volume to peak tidal expiratory flow to total expiratory volume; VT, tidal volume. The Rrs declines with age, whereas the Crs
increases. The median Rrs is 5.04 (3.73,6.82) kPa/L/s and the mean Crs is 119.52±60.47 mL/kPa. The data are presented as the
mean±the standard deviation or as the median [25
th percentile, 75
th percentile (P25, P75)]. *, indicates a significant difference
between boys and girls in the age group (P﹤0.05).
Results
Two hundred sixty-three infants underwent the SOT.
The guardians of 19 infants refused to allow them to be
sedated. The guardians of 17 infants refused to allow
the children to undergo the test. Twenty-two infants
failed to provide valid data. We succeeded in performing
the measurements in 205 healthy infants from birth
up to 96 weeks of life (112 boys, 93 girls). The baseline
characteristics of the infants are displayed in Tables 1 and 2.
All participants underwent lung function testing safely. The
median age was 34 (range, 12–64) weeks, the mean length
was 69.95±11.14 cm, and the mean weight was 8.34±2.79 kg.
Length, weight, and BMI increased significantly with age
(Table 1).
Lung function results of the different groups were
compared (Table 2). The Rrs declined with age, whereas the
Crs increased. The median Rrs was 5.04 kPa/L/s (3.73–6.82),
and the mean Crs was 119.52±60.47 mL/kPa.
Univariate and multivariate regression equations for Crs
and Rrs are presented in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. The
Crs and Rrs in healthy infants from previous studies (5-10)
are displayed in Table 5.

## Page 4

516
Huang et al. Resistance and compliance in healthy infants
© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
Discussion
Respiratory disease is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in infants and has a significant effect on health
care (12-14). Like in adults, pulmonary function testing
has been playing an important role in measurement of
respiratory conditions in infants. Estimates of infant
pulmonary function are being used increasingly in clinical
and epidemiological studies (15). Guidelines regarding
the methodology and equipment have been developed by
the ATS and ERS Task Force (16), but there remains a
shortage of reference equations for interpreting results.
Infants cannot meet the demands of routine pulmonary
function tests; therefore, the SOT can be used to reveal the
condition of the respiratory physiology. Only small samples
using this method to obtain reference values in infants have
been described (8). To our knowledge, our study is the first
to use the SOT to establish reference values for resistance
and compliance in infants in Southeast China.
During the single breath occlusion technique, the
Table 3 Univariate regression equations for compliance and resistance in girls and boys
Variable
Equation
P
R
2
Female infants
Resistance
7.844 – 0.079 week + 0.000112 week
2 + 0.000004 week
3
<0.005
0.269
Resistance
20.338 – 0.274 cm + 0.000001 cm
2 + 0.000012 cm
3
<0.005
0.223
Resistance
5.230 + 1.996 weight – 0.425 weight
2 + 0.022 weight
3
<0.005
0.261
Resistance
16.93–4.041 in BMI
<0.05
0.063
Male infants
Resistance
6.936e
–0.008 week
<0.005
0.227
Resistance
22.268e
–0.021 cm
<0.005
0.198
Resistance
11.221e
–0.094 weight
<0.005
0.232
Female infants
Compliance
52.132 + 1.571 week + 0.011 week
2 + 0.000184 week
3
<0.005
0.543
Compliance
−174.607 + 5.093 cm – 0.013 cm
2
<0.005
0.508
Compliance
58.819 − 13.818 weight + 4.113 weight
2 – 0.186 weight
3
<0.005
0.526
Compliance
18.153 + e
0.103 BMI
<0.05
0.199
Male infants
Compliance
51.148 + 3.147 week – 0.0281 week
2 + 0.000099 week
3
<0.005
0. 396
Compliance
9.552e
0.034cm
<0.005
0.41
Compliance
31.03e
0.145 weight
<0.005
0.44
Compliance
−787.863 + 140.338 BMI – 7.006 BMI
2 + 0.115 BMI
3
<0.05
0.046
BMI, body mass index; Crs, compliance; Rrs, resistance.
Table 4 Multivariate regression equations for compliance and resistance in girls and boys
Variable
Equation
P
R
2
Female infants
Resistance
7.509−0.046 week
<0.005
0.240
Compliance
57.942+1.345 week
<0.005
0.552
Male infants
Resistance
5.87−5.489×10
-6e
weight
<0.005
0.061
Compliance
−44.705 + 0.026 cm
2 + 0.13 BMI
2
<0.05
0.395
BMI, body mass index; Crs, compliance; Rrs, resistance.

## Page 5

517
Journal of Thoracic Disease, Vol 8, No 3 March 2016
© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
airway is briefly occluded at the end of inspiration. The
Hering-Breuer reflex leads to respiratory system relaxation
during the occlusion. It is a relatively simple and useful
method for the early detection of pulmonary diseases and
for monitoring normal growth in infants. This simple
technique allows measurement of the Crs and Rrs and the
derivation of predictive equations for Crs and Rrs based on
multiple regression analysis. In a study by Hanrahan et al. (11),
passive respiratory mechanics were assessed using the SOT
in 127 infants (55 boys and 72 girls) between 2 weeks and 18
months old. Respiratory compliance increased significantly
with increasing infant length, whereas respiratory resistance
(Rrs) declined (11). Their results were in line with those of
Lanteri and Sly (17) and with the findings reported in the
present study (Figures 1,2). Decreased Rrs was caused by
the increased diameter of the airway and lung volume during
childhood. Respiratory compliance increased gradually
with the increase in the lung elastic fiber network. In our
study, the dispersion degree of the resistance distribution
decreased with the growth of the infants (Figure 1). There
are two possible reasons. One is that, although nasal airway
resistance contributes as much as 50% of the total airway
resistance in newborns, the influence of nasal resistance
on the total resistance decreases with the development of
the upper airway. The other reason is that the variation
in airway resistance is reduced by increased stability of
the respiratory rate and respiratory rhythm with the
development of the lung and airway (18).
Sex differences in lung function are well recognized in
children. Sex-specific normative equations are a standard
feature of commercially available lung function equipment.
Lanteri and Sly (17) published sex-specific equations for
compliance and resistance, which were measured under
general anesthesia in children aged 3 weeks to 15 years.
In a longitudinal study by Turner et al. (19), lung function
was initially lower in boys than in girls, but this difference
reversed by 18 years of age. In a population-based birth
cohort study by Belgrave et al. (20), boys had higher airway
resistance than girls, and airway resistance increased
significantly more in boys than in girls. However, in our
study, we did not observe significant differences between
boys and girls. These results were in line with those of
studies by McKenzie et al. (21) and Zhang et al. (22). A
larger sample size is needed to interpret this conflict in the
future.
Reference equations for the SOT measured in infants
are not widely available in the literature. The Crs and
Rrs obtained in our study are equal to or somewhat lower
than the values presented in previous studies. For Rrs, we
found that age was an independent determinant in girls
(explained 24% of variance), and weight was an independent
determinant in boys (explained 6.1% of variance). For
Table 5 Compliance and resistance in healthy infants from previous studies
Author
n
Age
Crs (mL/kPa)
Crs (mL/kPa/kg)
Rrs (kPa/L/sec)
Masters et al. 1987 (5)
7
4.7 (SE 0.3) weeks
12.2 (SE 1.4)
3.8 (SE 0.3)
Haouzi et al. 1991 (6)
9
Range, 2–19 days
10.0±1.2
7.4±1.8
Hanrahan et al. 1996 (11)
Female infants
56
5.1±1.8 weeks
56.5± ±17.3
8.2±4.2
Male infants
34
5.0±1.0 weeks
55.1±16.6
8.6±4.2
Reiterer and Müller 2003 (7)
21
65±30 hr
13.5±1.0
3.6±0.8
Katier et al. 2006 (8)
328
4.7±1.3 weeks
Median 39.5
 (range, 14.8–79.1)
Median 9.4
 (range, 3.2–21.8)
Median 7.4
 (range, 3.8–19.5)
Female infants
176
4.7±1.3 weeks
Median 39.2
 (range, 14.8–79.1)
Median 9.4
 (range, 3.8–15.2)
Median 7.0
 (range, 3.9–17.5)
Male infants
152
4.7±1.3 weeks
Median 40.6
(range, 17.2–76.1)
Median 9.0
(range, 3.2–21.8)
Median 8.0
 (range, 3.8–19.5)
van Putte-Katier, et al.
2012 (9)
836
4.6±1.3 weeks
43.9±10.7
 (range, 14.8–86.6)
7.2±2.2
 (range, 3.2–19.5)
Nguyen et al. 2013 (10)
105
35.5 weeks
(range, 2.6–104.7 weeks)
99.4±38.0
12.5±2.0
4.0±1.3
Crs, compliance; Rrs, resistance; SE, standard error.

## Page 6

518
Huang et al. Resistance and compliance in healthy infants
© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
Crs, we found that age was independent determinant in
girls (explained 55.2% of variance), and length and BMI
were independent determinants in boys (explained 39.5% of
variance). The mean values and prediction equations differs
among previous studies, which is attributable to differences
in sample size, age range of the participants, race, and other
differences underlying the population (23).
The results of our study, as in most previous studies, were
obtained with infants under sedation, which can occasionally
result in mild respiratory depression with mild hypoxemia and a
slight decrease in tidal volume (1). A comparison of infants during
natural sleep with other groups of infants after sedation showed
either an increased minute ventilation in the sedation group or
Rrs (Kpa/s/l)
Length (cm)
45
70
50
55
60
65
75
80
85
90
95
30
20
10
0
Figure 1 Scatter diagram and trend line for Rrs compared to length.
Rrs declined with length, and Crs increased. The degree of dispersion
of the resistance distribution decreased with the growth of the infants.
Crs, compliance; Rrs, resistance.
Figure 2 Scatter diagram and trend line for Crs compared to
length. Crs increased with length. Crs, compliance.
a decreased respiratory rate in the sedation group (24).
A study by Gelb et al. (25) found no evidence that
sedation increased airway resistance. In the future, we
will perform the SOT in infants during natural sleep and
compare the differences between the results obtained
with sedation and without sedation.
There are some limitations in the present study.
First, like most other studies, our data were obtained
from a cross-sectional survey, which limited our ability
to explain short- or longer-term changes in infants.
Further longitudinal studies are needed to track the
secular trends, particularly during lung growth and
development. Second, our results were obtained only
from infants in Southeast China, so the sample was only
weakly representative of all the infants in China. Further
studies should compare our results with those from
other areas in China. Third, we did not obtain other
variables that affect lung function (such as birth length,
birth weight, physical activity, parental lung function,
socioeconomic status, and thoracic dimensions). More
factors must be included in future studies to obtain more
accurate results.
Our study established reference equations of
resistance and compliance in Southeast Chinese infants
aged 1–96 weeks old by using the SOT. Our results
were based on recently collected data and accurately
described the relationship between infant lung function
and anthropometric variables. In the future, we will use
the reference equations in epidemiological studies and
in clinical practice.
Acknowledgements
None.
Footnote
Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.
References
1.
Peterson-Carmichael SL, Rosenfeld M, Ascher SB,
et al. Survey of clinical infant lung function testing
practices. Pediatr Pulmonol 2014;49:126-31.
2.
Ren CL, Robinson P, Ranganathan S. Chloral hydrate
sedation for infant pulmonary function testing. Pediatr
Pulmonol 2014;49:1251-2.
Crs (ml/Kpa)
Length (cm)
45
70
50
55
60
65
75
80
85
90
95
150
100
50
0
200

## Page 7

519
Journal of Thoracic Disease, Vol 8, No 3 March 2016
© Journal of Thoracic Disease. All rights reserved.
J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519
jtd.amegroups.com
3.
Katier N, Uiterwaal CS, de Jong BM, et al. Feasibility
and variability of neonatal and infant lung function
measurement using the single occlusion technique. Chest
2005;128:1822-9.
4.
Gappa M, Colin AA, Goetz I, et al. Passive respiratory
mechanics: the occlusion techniques. Eur Respir J
2001;17:141-8.
5.
Masters IB, Seidenberg J, Hudson I, et al. Longitudinal
study of lung mechanics in normal infants. Pediatr
Pulmonol 1987;3:3-7.
6.
Haouzi P, Marchal F, Crance JP, et al. Respiratory
mechanics in spontaneously breathing term and preterm
neonates. Biol Neonate 1991;60:350-60.
7.
Reiterer F, Müller W. Assessment of the single-occlusion
technique for measurements of respiratory mechanics
and respiratory drive in healthy term neonates using a
commercially available computerized pulmonary function
testing system. Biol Neonate 2003;83:117-22.
8.
Katier N, Uiterwaal CS, de Jong BM, et al. Passive
respiratory mechanics measured during natural sleep in
healthy term neonates and infants up to 8 weeks of life.
Pediatr Pulmonol 2006;41:1058-64.
9.
van Putte-Katier N, van der Gugten AC, Uiterwaal CS, et
al. Early life lung function and respiratory outcome in the
first year of life. Eur Respir J 2012;40:198-205.
10.	 Nguyen TT, Hoo AF, Lum S, et al. New reference
equations to improve interpretation of infant lung
function. Pediatr Pulmonol 2013;48:370-80.
11.	 Hanrahan JP, Brown RW, Carey VJ, et al. Passive
respiratory mechanics in healthy infants. Effects of
growth, gender, and smoking. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1996;154:670-80.
12.	 Sipahi EY. Experimental models of acute respiratory
distress syndrome. J Transl Intern Med 2014;2:154-9.
13.	 Yan J, Rao Q. Biomarkers in the diagnosis and prognostic
assessment of acute respiratory distress syndrome. J Transl
Intern Med 2014;2:160-3.
14.	 Mohammad Y, Yassine F, Khadouj M. Comorbidities in 99
COPD patients: A case series from Syria. J Transl Intern
Med 2015;3:167-70.
15.	 Vogt B, Falkenberg C, Weiler N, et al. Pulmonary function
testing in children and infants. Physiol Meas 2014;35:R59-90.
16.	 Frey U, Stocks J, Coates A, et al. Specifications for
equipment used for infant pulmonary function testing.
ERS/ATS Task Force on Standards for Infant Respiratory
Function Testing. European Respiratory Society/
American Thoracic Society. Eur Respir J 2000;16:731-40.
17.	 Lanteri CJ, Sly PD. Changes in respiratory mechanics
with age. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1993;74:369-78.
18.	 Tabary A, Rassler B. Increased breathing resistance
compromises the time course of rhythmical forearm
movements—a pilot study. J Transl Intern Med
2015;3:161-6.
19.	 Turner S, Fielding S, Mullane D, et al. A longitudinal
study of lung function from 1 month to 18 years of age.
Thorax 2014;69:1015-20.
20.	 Belgrave DC, Buchan I, Bishop C, et al. Trajectories of
lung function during childhood. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2014;189:1101-9.
21.	 McKenzie SA, Chan E, Dundas I, et al. Airway resistance
measured by the interrupter technique: normative data
for 2-10 year olds of three ethnicities. Arch Dis Child
2002;87:248-51.
22.	 Zhang H, Xiao XM, Zheng S, et al. Study on the reference
values of tidal flow-volume loop in 1002 normal Chinese
children under 4 years old. The Journal of Clinical
Pediatrics (Chinese) 2006;6:486-8.
23.	 Quanjer PH, Stanojevic S, Cole TJ, et al. Multi-ethnic
reference values for spirometry for the 3-95-yr age range:
the global lung function 2012 equations. Eur Respir J
2012;40:1324-43.
24.	 Rabbette PS, Dezateux CA, Fletcher ME, et al. Influence
of sedation on the Hering-Breuer inflation reflex in
healthy infants. Pediatr Pulmonol 1991;11:217-22.
25.	 Gelb A, Southorn P, Rehder K, et al. Sedation and
respiratory mechanics in man. Br J Anaesth 1983;55:809-15.
Cite this article as: Huang J, Zhang H, Zhang M, Zhang
X, Wang L. Reference values for resistance and compliance
based on the single occlusion technique in healthy infants
from Southeast China. J Thorac Dis 2016;8(3):513-519. doi:
10.21037/jtd.2016.02.69
